
A master who lived as a hermit on a mountain was asked by a
monk, "What is the Way?
"What a fine mountain this is," the master said in reply
"I am not asking you about the mountain, but about the Way.
"So long as you cannot go beyond the mountain, my son, you
cannot reach the Way," replied the master
----
Jizo asked Shuzanshu,
“Where have you come from?”
Shuzanshu said,
“I have come from the South.”
Jizo said,
“How is Buddhism in the South these days?”
Shuzanshu said,
“There is much lively discussion.”
Jizo said,
“How could that match with our planting the rice field here and making
rice-balls to eat?”
Shuzanshu said,
“How could you then save the beings of the Three Worlds?”
Jizo said,
“What do you call ‘the Three Worlds’?”
----
Great Master Unmon said,
“When the light does not penetrate, there are two diseases. Everything is
unclear and things hang before you: this is one disease. Even after you
have realized the emptiness of all things, somehow you feel as if there were
still something there. This shows that the light has not yet penetrated
thoroughly.
Also there are two diseases concerning the Dharma-body. You have reached the
Dharma-body, but you remain attached to the Dharma and cannot extinguish your
own view; therefore you lead a corrupt life around the Dharma-body: this is
one disease. Suppose you have truly penetrated to the end, if you give up
further efforts, it will not do. You examine yourself minutely and say you
have no flaw: this is nothing but a disease.”
----
Emperor Bu of Ryo asked Great Master Bodhidharma,
“What is the highest meaning of the holy reality?”
Bodhidharma replied,
“Vast and void, no holiness.”
The emperor said,
“Who are you in front of me?”
Bodhidharma said,
“I don’t know.”
The emperor did not match him.

Finally, Bodhidharma crossed the Yangtse River and came to the Shorin Temple.
There he sat for nine years, facing the wall.
----
Once the monks of the eastern and western Zen halls in Nansen’s temple were
quarrelling about a cat. As he saw this, Nansen held up the cat and said,
“You monks! If one of you can say a word, I will not slay the cat.”
No one could answer. Nansen cut the cat in two. Nansen told Joshu what had
happened, and asked him for his view. Joshu thereupon took his sandals, put
them upon his head and went away. Nansen said,
“If you had been there, I could have spared the cat.”
----
Isan asked Kyozan,
“Where have you come from?”
Kyozan said,
“From the rice field.”
Isan said,
“How many people are there in the rice field?”
Kyozan thrust his hoe into the ground and stood with his hands folded on his
chest. Isan said,
“There are a great number of people cutting thatch on the South Mountain.”
Kyozan took up his hoe and left immediately.
----
Ganto came to Tokusan. He straddled the threshold of the gate and asked,
“Is this ordinary or is this holy?”
Tokusan shouted,
“Kaatz!”
Ganto made a deep bow.
Hearing of this, Tozan said,
“Hardly anyone but Ganto could have accepted it that way.”
Ganto said,
“Old Tozan can’t tell between good and bad. At that time, I raised up with
one hand and suppressed with the other.”
